Eric, welcome back to Talk Python to Me. Great to have you here.
Nice to see you again, Michael.
Nice to see you as well. Last time we talked about your book, right? And now your project,
your deployment project. I love talking about deployment because I think it's such an enabling
technology or enabling skill. And your project Django Simple Deploy is certainly in that realm.
Yes, I have appreciated your comments about deployment over the years.
Thanks. Well, they're a hard one. My skills in deployment are a hard one. I kind of want to
talk a little bit about the journey for people, but not yet. Let's get a quick introduction of
who is Eric? What do you do? What's new in your life since the last time you were on the show?
Oh, gosh. Yeah. It's all context for this project because this project
ties together a lot of the different things that I've done. Short version, I grew up in New Hampshire,
moved to New York City, then moved to Alaska. Just last year, moved to Western North Carolina.
And I had a background in science. I studied physics in college and got pulled into teaching,
spent a long time teaching math and science, fifth grade through 12th grade, which was super fun because
it's not at the level of undergrad or grad work, but the questions young people ask always make things
interesting. And I got pulled into programming because I always did it on the side.
And I kind of felt like, I always felt like at some point, I might focus more on programming and less on
classroom teaching. So for the past five, six years, I've been a full-time writer and programmer.
It's been enjoyable. Yeah. And congrats on the move. You really like to sample different
weather systems, different environments. You're going to get a different summer experience
in North Carolina than you might in Alaska. I know it gets warm somewhat there, but
it's warm a lot in North Carolina. Yeah. We're in the mountains so we can have cool nights at least.
Yeah. Lovely. My brother lives there and I think North Carolina is a really new place.
It is. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So let's talk about this going from science to teaching
to programming just a little bit, because I did a very similar journey. I think mine was accelerated in
terms of its timeframe, but I was in grad school. I studied math and then taught math, calculus,
linear algebra, those kinds of things at universities at GTA, and then kind of got into programming as
part of it. And then I'm like, wow, this is really fun. How do I, how do I do more of this? You know what
I mean? And after evaluating it, just academia didn't seem like a thing I really wanted to
try to chase. And so I basically, I took one or two programming classes, but otherwise, other than
that, I taught myself programming a number of years ago. That is kind of scary last century, let's say.
And I don't know, I feel totally confident about it these days, but at first it was, you know, do I belong
here? All the things seem hard. Yep. Should, what am I doing wrong? Should I have gotten a CS degree? I don't
think any of those things are true. I think just, you know, as I learned hanging out with CS people,
it was hard for them too. Like it's, but maybe talk a little bit about your journey, right? Because
I'm sure it would be helpful to other people. There's many people out there who are doing something
somewhat similar. Yeah. Questions about academia kind of steered me this way as well. I studied physics in
undergrad because I started as chemical engineer because I had a great chemistry class in high school,
school. But I found that engineering classes felt like being taught how to solve other people's
problems. And my favorite class as an undergrad, or as a freshman was physics, because it was the only
class that really seemed about truly trying to understand the world. And I love that. So that's
what led me to focus on physics. And I was going to be a particle physicist, but I did not want to be--
I wanted to spend some time outside Chicago or wherever. Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. And I, yeah, when I was really young, I heard about atom smashers. I thought somebody like
literally had hammers where they smashed atoms. So every stage--
Very small hammers.
Yes. Every stage I learned more about it, it was more and more fascinating. But I didn't want to be a
student forever. And so I wanted to do something outside of being a student before pursuing the
graduate work that would get to be--get me to be a particle physicist. So when I was looking what to do,
I had been a tutor in undergrad, and I tutored calculus and physics. And I tutored those classes
because I watched classmates hate--start to hate math and physics because of how they were taught. And
that's the only reason people hated those topics. And it was really humbling because I was 18, 19 years
old and tutoring people in their 30s and 40s who were doing mid-career changes.
Speaking of feeling like you maybe don't necessarily belong there telling someone how to do something.
When--but--but at the same time, you probably knew it really well, right?
Yeah. Yeah. And I felt like I belonged, but it was really humbling as far as just sorting out like
school systems and where to go. So anyway, that led me into teaching. And I thought I would just teach
for a couple years and then go back to science. But I found that the challenge of reaching everybody in
the classroom was as hard and as satisfying as hard science. And so I just love teaching.
I love what it brings up for other people. And yeah, it's always stayed interesting.
Yeah.
For me--for me--for me--I'm sorry--for me to transition into more focus on programming was my father died.
I've told this story a few times over the years about the origin of the book Python Crash Course. But my
father died in 2011. And my mom asked--he was a programmer. That's how I first learned to program.
My mom asked me to go through his computer and she found all these--or she asked me to go through his
computer to see if there was anything worth keeping. And there wasn't. But for me, it was a really personal
experience of seeing all these projects he had started that would never get finished. And I realized that I had a bunch of
those programming projects as well. And so that kind of was a turning point for me to get me out of the
practice of just building a bunch of side projects and started to focus on one or two real world projects
that other people would benefit from.
That's a great story. That's certainly one of the challenges of you can build a project and you can
get it to run. But you're maybe halfway there getting it out to the world in a real world sort of way.
You know, you've got all these challenges of, "Well, I need to pick a place to run my app."
Wait a minute. Databases? Why are these migrations so hard? How do I do migrations? Like,
I got the first one up and now I can't change it. It just breaks. It doesn't run anymore. And
you know, there's just all these aspects and not even taking into account the stuff you got to add
to go from a toy project to making it real. Logging, error handling, et cetera, et cetera, right?
Yeah. I mean, this is all a good segue into the topic of today. I mean, Django Simple Deployed,
to kind of put it out there for people who haven't heard of it, it's a package that automates
Django deployments. So if your project runs locally on your computer and you get to the
point where you want to make it public for other people to use, if you haven't already gone through
the deployment process, for most people that's a cliff and they kind of just fall off. I spend all
this time learning Django, all this time building this project they really care about, solves the
problem, does it better than other people's work because, you know, it's new and whatnot. And then they
go to deploy it and they find that they have to spend so much time reading a platform's documentation,
tweaking their settings, adding this file or that file, and then kind of crossing your fingers and hoping
that it works. Every time I've gone through that process, I've kind of thought to myself, this is all
just boilerplate. Like we're just being told to everybody's being told to add the same settings, make the
same modifications. And so I had that shower. Like automation. Yeah. Yeah. I had that shower thought
of like, okay, how could we do this configuration from the Django side? So when we're just looking at
the user's computer, you've got a project that's working locally. We know it works. How can we do
all the configuration automatically so that you then just push your automatically correctly configured project
to your hosting platform? So Django simple deploy does that you pick install on Django simple deploy.
You need to have a plugin for the platform that you're using. So fly IO is a go to example.
And then you add Django simple deploy to install that. And then there's two modes for this project work.
The fully automated mode is easier to talk about because you run one command,
Wifi manage.py deploy --automate all. And if you do that, and you have that platform CLI installed,
it configures your project, makes a git commit and pushes your project and your project appears
in a new browser window, which feels like magic.
Yeah, that's kind of magical actually.
Yeah, yeah. All right. So I want to talk about what platforms are supported. But before we do,
maybe we could talk more broadly about just hosting platforms that you've considered that you see out
there that people publish Django apps to. Right. On one hand, we've got really, really straightforward platforms.
On the other, you can get as complicated as you want. Basically, you play the game of how many AWS
services can you combine into one Django app? Yeah.
You know, it's kind of like the obfuscated code contest. How much can you fit under one line that's
unlegible, but still does the thing or whatever, right?
Yeah. You know, we started this with a conversation about our backgrounds. And so kind of weaving this
for a little bit back into that background story. I do remember one of my transitions to doing more
professional programming work was when I was teaching, I would write programs to address inefficiencies and
difficulties we had in our school for our staff. And so I remember like exactly this, getting something that
like automated report card generation for our staff and I got it working on my computer. So like,
for me writing report cards was so much easier than for everybody else. And so I learned Django and like,
cool, I can share this with everybody else. And I tried to deploy it and it just, I could not do it.
It just, I fell apart. And I sort of figured it out. So my first deployment platform was a laptop in a closet in my school, connected directly to the school network. So the deployment worked for people on our network. And it was only out of the kindness of our IT staff that would allow me to do that. Clearly not a solution for most people.
And very limited.
This is really hard to deploy. Let me just deploy my machine to the school.
Yes. Yes. Update. Let me go to that closet.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. I'm gonna be in here for a few hours. I'm programming on the server.
Yeah. So, okay. Heroku is the first one to talk about because Heroku was one of the first platforms that really automated a lot of the DevOps work.
Mm-hmm.
And allowed us the classic sales pitch for Heroku was run, get push Heroku main and your project is live.
Yeah.
There's always a bit more to it than that, including that configuration to make your project work on Heroku.
So the platforms I start thinking about are the ones that manage the DevOps aspect for you. Heroku,
fly to IO, platform.sh, Python Anywhere is in there.
Yeah. So to take a step back even further, this project started because I used Heroku for a while.
In Python Crash Course, the first edition, I taught people, I walked people through deploying a Django project to Heroku.
It's the only part of the book that felt like I'm not really teaching anything. I'm just telling people to write certain things and add certain files.
A bit of explanation about what it does, but mostly it's, you know, make these changes and cross your fingers that you type them all right.
So I wrote a Heroku build pack that did the configuration automatically, but it did it on Heroku servers.
So you'd specify this build pack, it would load that build pack onto Heroku servers, and then all your configuration changes would happen on their end.
And so that-
Tell us about it. What is a build pack?
I'm not sure that I can tell you. It's basically, I said it, my-
I'll tell you, I've never built a build pack myself and I've deployed a lot of Python, so.
Yeah. The short, my short description is it's a set of programs, body of code that configures your project for running on that specific platform.
Got it. Okay.
And so typically it's, it's generic and it's not targeting, it's not trying to do any changes to your, your project.
We won't go further. I'll say something wrong.
Yeah, yeah, sure. Yeah, yeah. Sounds good.
But the takeaway for that is it felt like doing Heroku's work for them.
And so it was nice for anybody trying to push Django to Heroku, but that, that boundary of like, what's our work? What's their work? Are we doing work free for them?
That's an interesting question. And it really felt like it was skewed towards doing their work.
Right. Well, I've done it once or twice, deployed an app to Heroku, never for real work, but to, you know, play around with it and sort of check it out because Heroku was definitely a darling of the Python space.
And certainly of the Python tutorials, right?
Because for a long time they had a free tier.
And so everybody who needed to deploy something was like, here's how you put it on Heroku to sort of complete the loop and get it out there in the world. Right.
Right. And then, yeah, you know, a testament to Heroku is how long it has worked without a lot of attention from them.
And so they, they lost a lot of trust in the community, not just from doing away with their free tier.
It's really hard to maintain a free tier. It's just puts a big target on the platform for abuse.
But it's, it's about some reliability issues and communication issues around, around issues on the platform.
So there was an exodus from Heroku for a while. And I was, I was working on this automation problem for a while.
And I had that shower thought of like, okay, all that work that I'm doing through the build pack on Heroku's end could be done through a management command with Njango.
So you can do all that, the changes to your project on your computer, if you know what to do.
So internally, Django simple deploy is just a single management command that deploy command.
And when you run that command, based on the plugin that you have installed, it knows which platform you're targeting.
And then basically I've just spent hours pouring over the documentation for a few different platforms.
And so we pick up the platform that you're trying to deploy to make all the changes necessary for a basic initial deployment to that platform.
And then there's two ways you can, you can push your project.
The fully automated mode makes it puts all those changes into a single commit, runs that platform's deploy command and pops up your project in a new, a new window.
Yeah.
And it does.
Go ahead.
The trends, the transport mechanism is get right.
Good question.
Not necessarily.
Okay.
The transport mechanism is whatever that platform uses.
So for fly, Django simple deploy makes the configuration changes for your project.
And then it calls the fly deploy command.
So I don't even have to know what fly deploy is using behind the scenes.
Because you, you have the CLI installed simple deploy calls that, that deploy command.
And then it's, for Heroku, when it gets to that deployment stage, in the automated mode, Django simple deploy runs, get push Heroku main.
And so it's, it's one of the nice things about this project.
And part of the reason it has taken so long to get to 1.0 is, it is quite adaptable to different approaches.
Yeah.
That's, that's pretty wild.
Because you're just automating the CLI for that platform, right?
Right.
and Chris, Chris is commenting, there should be one obvious way to deploy your Django project to a service.
Yeah, he's right.
The nice thing about this is, Django simple deploy becomes this abstraction layer between your work and the platform.
So it creates a nice consistent interface for deploying to a wide range of platforms.
And when, when a platform inevitably changes their deployment process, or configuration requirements,
as long as one person makes that update to the Django simple deploy plugin, everybody else gets to just keep using that consistent interface for how you do your initial deployment, which is really, really nice.
Yeah, it is really nice.
You don't have to worry about all the details and also the ability to move without losing all of your expertise, you know?
Right.
this is where it gets really fun to talk about this project because, you know, people think when the people first hear about this project, they think it's just for beginners, right?
It's just for people who already know deployment.
yeah.
But, where was I going with that?
oh, so thinking about writers, authors, myself first, but content creators, tutorial writers, presenters.
If you're, wanting to include deployment as part of your, your process that you're teaching people, then a lot of people have chosen not to do that.
Because as soon as you include deployment, you're now tied to that platforms, stability.
As soon as they change their process, you've got to update your materials or it's broken.
And, that's not appealing.
So for somebody who uses Django simple deploy in their tutorial, again, as long as one of us keeps the plugin updated to work on that platform, your, your learning resources stays the same.
That is really nice.
Yeah.
Whether you're teaching a college class or you're just writing something for your blog, it is really nice.
And I think about the Django girls workshops.
And so, you know, part of that, the goal of that conclusion of, of deploying your project, it's just to see a live.
Like, why are we doing this if we can't see a live?
you don't necessarily want to spend a whole bunch of time focused on deployment.
And so if you can kind of really crunch that into like, okay, we're going to run these commands.
We have a working deployment.
It's not about hiding deployment from people.
Because one of the coolest parts of this project is that it contains all those configuration changes in a single gate command.
Is there a verbose mode where you get it to show all the little steps it's doing and stuff?
Yeah.
it is, verbose by default.
So you get to basically it's, it streams and dumps all the platforms output, as it's deploying, which is kind of important because if you don't do that, you just see this blank screen for two, three, seven minutes.
Yeah.
Just that they're spinning.
but to slow this down, take a step back for a minute.
I've, I've mentioned the automated mode where you include this --automate all that's easiest to talk about because it, it boils down this deployment process to three steps.
I don't actually recommend that for most people because it, it, it makes a, git commit for you, runs a deploy command.
And maybe you want to have a little more control about that process.
There's a configuration only mode, which is every, every bit is helpful.
but it lets you kind of take a little more control.
And so what you do for most platforms, you have to create a resource, basically a deployed project, an empty project on that platform.
And then you run deploy, and Django simple deploy recognizes the resource you just created on that platform, configures your project.
and, and then it stops.
And so you now have a configured project and you can run, get diff and you get to see all the configuration that were changes that were made on your behalf.
You know, you see, you don't have to just trust it.
Yeah.
So when I shared this on, the Django discord yesterday, somebody was excited about it.
And then I said something about that commit that was made and they said, Oh, it makes commits for you.
Oh, I'm not sure I want to use that.
Is it okay.
You can, you can do the longer mode where you get to review that.
and then you can, you can see all the files that were created for that platform.
You can see the settings changes that were made to make your project work.
and then you can choose to make that commit.
you can choose to push it.
Yeah.
or revert it.
Even if you use the automated mode, is still all the configuration is one commit.
And so you can just revert that commit and you're right back to your, your project.
I'll throw one more piece in there right away.
One of the priorities of the project is that it does not change the local behavior of your project.
And so when I run the test suite, it tests that all the configuration changes are correct for
the target platform, but it also runs run server again, locally and make sure that we haven't,
impacted, the local, local running of your project.
Oh, interesting.
It'll run it to make sure it basically starts.
Nice.
Yeah.
You know, this, automated versus config sort of deal.
It, it reminds me a little bit of how maybe DBAs feel about ORMs.
You know, like they're, they're like, Oh, you can't just let, let it run arbitrary queries against
my database.
Like, right.
How do we know it's doing the right thing?
And I'm sure you feel that way for a while, you know, but eventually, all right, we've,
we've reviewed them.
They're fine.
Right.
So maybe this config thing you do a couple of times, you're like, yeah, that's what I would
do anyway.
Just run it.
Right.
Yeah.
What else are you going to do?
You're probably going to create a script that does the things you expect it to do anyway
for yourself as a bash script or something.
Right.
And so might as well be a Python script.
Yeah.
I mean, it's funny hearing you talk about this because this project started as a pile of bash
scripts.
And so, yeah, yeah.
I got a pile of bash scripts on my server.
They do things.
Yeah.
One of the pre 1.0 tasks was a long issue that was just about converting all these shell
scripts to, to Python.
And mostly that was about creating, making this work cross platform.
So it's basically taken me like four years to get this to 1.0.
And it's that 80, 20 principle turned into like 595 principle.
Yeah.
so another reason, so a good thing to, to kind of move into.
Another reason it took so long to get to 1.0 was originally, this was all one library.
And so it was just Django simple deploy.
And originally you would run manage.py deploy --platform, fly.io.
And so the entire project contained all the code for all the different platforms.
and that felt better than the original project, just targeting Heroku because you have
choice, but it felt like a nightmare for maintenance.
Yeah.
It's anytime any project changes, it's gonna need an update and it's just gonna grow exponentially.
It becomes combinatorially complex in terms of dependencies.
Yeah.
Which is not a good, order of magnitude or, and, yeah, it's not good.
So I had some people kind of, you know, very kindheartedly nudging me towards just doing a
1.0 release to get over that, that fear of a 1.0 release.
but it was always about having, I had a vision, that the mature version of this project should be
plugin based.
so the core project Django simple deploy is small, it's platform agnostic.
All it does is inspect your project, inspect your system, and then hand out the rest of the
work to a plugin.
And so currently there's a plugin targeting fly.io plugin for platform.sh platform for Heroku.
I have a proof of concept, plugin for code red and I'm working on a proof of concept for digital
ocean.
awesome.
Yeah.
So many cool things to talk about with this.
yeah.
Yeah.
Before we go, I do want to maybe just, go through some of these, these hosts and let,
let you give a talk about maybe why they're included, which ones are there's stuff out there,
obviously that's not included.
Why is it not included?
Right.
So Heroku obvious, especially when you started, when they had the free tier and stuff like that.
I, I kind of want to get them.
I know people are angry at them.
I understand that, but I also, I kind of want to give them a little bit of a pass, like
offering free hosting to the world where people just put up malware and other badness and use
the trust of your domain to sort of leverage, leverage that is it's challenging.
And I don't know, I understand people are frustrated with them, but that's, that's tough.
So Heroku platform as a service, you push your stuff up.
You say, here's my code.
Here's how you started.
Run it for me, please.
There's not a lot of Linux.
There's not a lot of shell, right?
They kind of take care of that for you.
Yes.
They do.
And there's still, yeah.
I've had conversations with people who, with founders of a number of these platforms
over the years, because it's always interesting to talk about this.
and platforms would love to see an easier way to deploy Django projects.
one of those founders said something really insightful at one point, and I appreciated the
honesty.
He said, we're all trying to be second best for beginners.
because if you, if you draw that crowd, you're drawing more support than the benefit in the short term.
And so for, yeah, for a long time, Heroku paid that cost.
they were willing to be the go-to for everybody.
So there's still a lot of projects running long-term on Heroku.
I know some important Python ones that are there.
Yeah.
Okay.
And then we got fly.io and platform.sh, you know, what's the story of these?
Honestly, I haven't used either of them.
I've heard of them.
I haven't used them.
So the selling principle for selling point for fly.io is they're an edge-based platform.
And so they take, yeah, they take your
if I'm saying this right, they take your project and they, they put, push your application
code to a bunch of different nodes.
And so your code is kind of like a CDN, right?
Yeah.
CDN for your application code.
And so your code is close to your end users.
And so I don't need it, but they've been, they've built it well enough that I can just
push a project there and it works.
And I'm a big fan of, you know, if your project does what you needed to,
is it good question?
Is it good enough?
And so it's been good enough for me for a lot.
And I know it's targeting some more complex use cases.
I have so many questions.
Yeah.
It's so interesting.
Well, I just think the first thing that comes to mind is what about databases, right?
If they, if your app is running, yeah, you gotta, you gotta have some way to like correlate
and centralize and make the consistency of the database and all that work.
Yeah.
They've got some fantastic people working for them and they have some fantastic blog posts.
So they've done really interesting cutting edge work around distributed SQLite, SQLite.
Yeah.
Databases.
And so, yeah, they are quite familiar with that question and they-
I'm sure they are.
I've answered it, have answered it well and they are entering it well.
If you can answer that question well, then you can get some stuff that flies, you know?
Yeah.
I mean, I guess, hence the name.
I didn't even do that on purpose.
I've been using bunny.net, which is a really nice, really nice CDN platform, but just for static content,
you know?
Not for, not for application code that talks to the database.
And I understand how you would replicate the database, but the challenge is if you have chatty rights,
right?
You know, if you're- all of a sudden you're pushing your database away from your app,
which has its own sort of latency and stuff, but what an interesting idea.
Okay.
And Platform.sh?
Platform.sh started as a PHP- I believe started as a PHP-only platform, but then expanded to
support other languages.
And so they had been sponsors of DjangoCon for a long time.
And I really enjoy working with their platform.
Deployment is pretty straightforward.
And then, you know, one of the things I look for in these platform as a service is, so once you push it,
I'm very happy to have them managing the DevOps work.
I also want to be able to like get into the server and run commands and see what's going on.
And so they make it easy to do that.
Yeah.
If things are not starting or they're crashing or something, sometimes just go, just
30 seconds at a glance, it's a log file or something.
Oh yeah.
Or, or maybe why is that file?
That file is actually missing.
Oh, that's weird.
Let me see if I can just get that.
And then, then you're back to like, okay, back to the platform as a service and you're good.
You know?
Yeah.
And that's the, you know, platform as a service certainly works for people who know nothing about,
you know, hopping into a server and running commands.
But they're also for like people who know how to do that and don't want to do that.
And so a service like platform.sh that makes it easy to do both is also an, I see it as an onboarding
for people who, who have something worth deploying, don't know DevOps yet, but letting them hop in and
start to do that.
It's pretty interesting.
Yeah.
It's very interesting.
Okay.
So I can run Python manage.py deploy --automate all, and that will take my app and put
it into whatever destination you pick, right?
Of those three.
Right.
For these platforms as a service, a lot of times you have to have a database.
Sometimes that's a managed Postgres or whatever you might have data that has to import initially,
you know, if you're like, well, here's all the counties in the United States and we have to query
them for stuff.
So we preload that at first or how does all that get connected and, and happen?
Right.
If I had like no database, I just have a pure Django app that just runs Python.
Easy.
I see how this works, but then there's like, there's settings and stuff here that vary by
production versus dev.
Yeah.
Fun question.
So I've done most of the development work on Django simple deploy.
I've actually run sprints at several picons and several Django cons.
And this project has brought together like eight to 15 people at each sprint.
It draws some interest.
And so I, the project would not be where it is without those contributions.
A lot of those people have made some contributions and, you know, not done a whole lot outside of the
conferences, but that whole group of people has been available to just bounce ideas off of.
And so a lot of the pre 1.0 work was also like me getting rid of all the baggage.
It just kind of only made sense to me, or you really need to have, you know, years of contact
with the project to make sense of it.
And so now it's at a place where like the structure is pretty consistent.
And so one of the things I'm looking forward to is, you know, somebody else who knows fly.io
managing the fly.io plugin more than me.
And so they don't need to go deal with Django simple deploy.
They can focus on the parts of the script that do the things you were just talking about.
So all the configuration has been largely my choice, you know, okay, on Heroku, we'll choose this
Postgres instance because it's cheaper because it lets people get started.
It's possible for somebody to either take the Heroku plugin and add a few more CLI flags to give
you a bit more choice or just write your own Heroku plugin.
And so right now the plugin for Heroku is dsd-Heroku.
Somebody else could do like dsd-Heroku-large and it's meant for scaling large or deploying
large scale Heroku projects.
And so that's not a, I don't want to do that work.
They should write their own.
That's if you have a use case that you know well and you want to automate.
Simple deploy just becomes this again, abstraction layer for, you know, you have a consistent interface for
running that deployment from, from within Django.
Yeah.
There's a nice plugin model, which really opens things up.
I suppose the answer probably the short answer is probably, well, the Django ORM will create the
database structure for you.
If you could just tell it where the database is.
Right.
And I know certain apps I've built, if they have data that has to be preloaded, I'll just have a
little check like, hey, is this table got any data in it?
If not, run the load up the database the first time.
Otherwise, assume it's all good and keep going.
And that pretty much handles it.
Yeah.
I think, you know, there's kind of two directions I'll take this.
You know, a short list of the projects I've done over the years, they tend to be smaller,
but they tend to be impactful.
So one project, automated report cards for students.
I used to work with struggling students, students who were plenty smart, but life had happened and they
had gotten off track with, with school.
And so they just had holes in their, in their, in their graduation requirements.
And so those students wanted to graduate, but they didn't know where to focus their, their efforts.
And so looking at a transcript was really hard because it's just a bunch of like letters and numbers.
So I wrote a program that automated a generation of visual transcripts.
So I'd read their text-based transcript and then give them basically a chart with a bunch of like gauges.
And you just look at it in 30 seconds, know which classes you needed to focus on.
And it also went from deficiencies to strengths.
So traditionally we talked to students who are struggling and think you're, you need to do this.
You need to do that.
You could see where they needed to do their work, but you could also see where they had, had been shining.
You could see where the strengths were.
And so I wrote a project, I worked with whale researchers and people don't know this.
Sperm whales have learned to pick the fish off of, take a step back.
People catch halibut, fish for halibut by putting like literally miles long cables on the ocean floor or lines with a hook every six to 10 feet.
And so you put a thousand hooks on the ocean floor, leave it overnight or pull it.
And that's how you catch halibut.
And sperm whales have learned to listen for the sound of the transmission changes when somebody puts their boat into gear to pull those, those hooks.
They swim towards that sound and they just pick the fish off those lines.
Wow.
And so these researchers were starting to put transponders on boats that would allow anybody who saw a sperm whale to report that.
And then you could kind of time your, your fishing sets to be away from the sperm whales.
And so I wrote a project that just like these researchers didn't know how to get their data from one place to another.
And so I just wrote a small Django project that listened for that data and gave them a visible place where they could go to it and share it.
And one other, oh, I lived in Southeast Alaska.
We were having increasing landslides, more, more frequent landslides and more impactful.
And so I wrote a small project that examines real time stream data, stream gauge data and turns that into a measure of landside risk.
And I gave a talk about that last year at PyCon.
All those projects are small.
They're never going to scale to like millions of users.
They all need a database.
And so they all fit this model of something like I personally would build.
And if I didn't know deployment, those would not have ended up being useful.
And so this tool takes all these people out there right now who are getting the skills to build something that works locally.
And they don't have to like go through that three weeks to three months of learning how to deploy things.
So I appreciate you bringing up the questions of like what happens with these larger scale projects.
But there's also a whole class before you even get there of projects that are, that would make the world better if they could be easily deployed.
Such a challenge because if you go down the, there's so many paths that people get led down that are not good paths.
You know, it's sort of the architectural equivalent.
I guess even just the DevOps equivalent of you're not Microsoft, you're not Google, you're not Netflix.
You probably don't need the chaos monkey running around your whale research project.
Right, right.
Yeah.
But people read that and they're like, well, I saw a really awesome conference talk and people loved it about how they, they had like geo replication of their database and stuff.
You're like, yes, interesting.
Not for you.
Yeah.
So the other direction that's interesting to, to finish up this discussion.
So I'm targeting a VPS right now.
I have deployed Django project to digital ocean, just on the bare VPS for people less familiar with that virtual private server.
It's basically a brand new virtual Linux machine that you push your project to.
And so this is more complicated because rather than just like making a few configuration changes to your project and then running a platforms deploy command, you have to do that whole, like, you know, update the server, install Django, set up a git push if you want to do that approach.
Yeah.
Make the right like port changes and whatnot, expose that.
So it's more work for me to get that proof of concept done, but once it's done, you know, the work I'm doing to write a plugin for digital ocean would work just as well for Hetzner, just as well for Linode.
And then it opens up to all the different approaches that people take to deployment.
One of the interesting questions about Django simple deploy is what are the boundaries?
So what is simple?
yeah, and I don't even, I don't know the answer to that yet.
It shouldn't become tube loaded.
It shouldn't like re implement the entire CLI, for a platform.
but the bounds are pretty large.
Yeah.
So you could have a digital ocean, you know, that targets, you know, NGINX, Benicorn.
You could have one that targets using the Docker approach.
You could have one that targets, external databases.
There's really, it's a pretty open, platform for automating deployment processes.
Yeah, absolutely.
Lots of people.
I mean, once you knock out one of those virtual servers, it's really, really close to seeing, well, anything that can run a Linux VM pretty much can do it.
And you were talking about NGINX.
You know, you might, I don't know, have you considered Caddy?
Caddy server.com?
Yes.
And as I was saying NGINX, I was like, oh wait, there's another one that I should be saying.
Well, I use NGINX for all of my stuff because it's all, it's gotten over the years, gotten more and more complicated.
However, you know, it's, you've got to run, you've got to independently manage Let's Encrypt.
And there's this sort of scaling up process.
So first you've got to put the non-encrypted version up.
Then so that cert bot and all the Let's Encrypt stuff can find it.
Then you create the SSL certificate.
Then you change the configuration again.
So because it won't run saying it's SSL until it actually has this, like, there's this scaffolding step that's always messy.
And if I think like easy getting started for people, Caddy, which manages the security and all that, and has a real simple configuration language, it seems like it might be a good option.
And it has 62,000 GitHub stars.
It's, I think a person or two uses it, you know, that's kind of neat.
Yeah.
Last week, when I, before I started the DigitalOcean plugin, I asked on Mastodon how people are deploying to VPS these days.
And Caddy was one of the things that came up.
It was super interesting to see the range of approaches that people are using.
So, you know, as I go through this, I'm kind of asking the question for basic initial deployment for somebody new to this platform, what are the, what are some sane choices?
So Caddy or Nginx, Postgres or SQLite.
So I'll make those choices.
And one of the open questions that I don't have clear answers to is, you know, where are the boundaries around those plugins?
So I'll, I'll certainly implement a --DB flag that lets you choose like Postgres or SQLite.
But I don't want to do a flag for like --approach, daku or whatnot.
At some point it makes more sense to have other people write other plugins and just foster that plugin ecosystem.
Yeah.
So another consideration and came out in the audience was hinting at this before, and it's certainly the way that I'm doing things these days is Docker.
So let me just give you an example.
Like, yeah, you can go all in and you can run on like the doc, like EKS and all these kinds of things.
You can go way, way deep on it.
Or you can just do stuff as simple as like, Hey, I want, I want the front end web server to be caddy.
I could install caddy on the server using apt or whatever, but then, you know, those kinds of update more slowly.
You have less control over it.
You could just as equally well run a caddy Docker image on that machine and have basically a zero touch experience on the server itself, other than just having a Docker thing there.
Right.
And you can do whatever you want to that Docker image.
You could even have a, a caddy Django simple deploy one based off their original one or, you know, things like that, where you've got it exactly configured.
What's the story with Docker?
And how have you been thinking about that?
Because once you start to go to virtual server, you start to get into some of these processes and some of these ideas.
Yeah.
Great question.
And it certainly has come up multiple times.
My main experience with Docker is working with fly because fly is a Docker based approach.
I have not written my own Docker files, but I have learned about them.
And so short answer, you know, Docker is an approach to deployment and there's nothing stopping anybody from writing a plugin that has Docker based approach.
This kind of gets back to the question of like, what's next?
Yeah, it definitely does.
Yeah.
I'm going to finish the plugin for a proof of concept plugin for digital ocean.
I'll take it to the 1.0 version of that approach.
So people can reliably deploy to digital ocean with a particular, you know, articulated approach.
It'll be, it'll probably be, catty choice of SQLite or Progres.
Whereas, and then I'm probably like my best approach is probably to back off of writing more plugins because I could spend the next few years just enjoying exploring all these platforms and approaches.
but I really should back off just continue to let people know the project exists, make sure these plugins have started continue to work.
And so I think it's easier and easier to, for other people to write plugins.
Yeah.
I can already tell from the way you're talking, like you could, you know, I have a, DSD plugin template repository.
It's in the Django simple deploy organization.
And so if you want to write a plugin, you don't start from scratch.
You, download that, that repository for the DSD plugin template.
You don't clone it because there's no upstream for it.
Download it.
Yeah.
install it alongside simple deploy and development mode.
and you can run tests right away.
So you run an integration test and it just verifies that like, you know, it gives you a couple of questions.
What's the name of your platform?
What's the, command you want people to use?
do you support automate all?
And then it, it writes a new plugin for you with all the plumbing there, you run tests, verify that it works, and then you start writing your platform specific code.
And so there's a bit of a learning curve for developers where you got to learn like, okay, what, you know, Django simple deploy has a module called plugin utils.
And so that's how you like write output in a way that's consistent with the rest of the project feeds into its logging.
there's a run quick command for small changes you're making to the project.
There's a run slow command for things like deploy to make sure, you know, we're capturing output, streaming it and whatnot.
So you learn those utilities, but you pretty quickly get to a place where you're just focusing on your expertise or opinion about how to approach deployment for a particular platform.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'm sure there's a ton out there.
People can be like, well, what about my platform?
Right.
You know, I'm sure there's some folks who are experts at wherever they're deploying their code that could maybe come and create a plugin.
Absolutely.
And I, somebody tried to, write, write in support for Google.
What was it?
Google cloud.
Yeah.
Google.
GCP.
Google cloud.
Yeah.
A couple of years ago.
but that was back when there was no plugin system.
And so it got bogged down and just like all the back and forth between core and, and that platform.
These days that person could just, download that, that plugin template and start focusing on the platform.
Yeah.
Awesome.
I'm sure that there's people out there thinking, Hey, we could do this for Azure.
Hey, we could do this for AWS as well.
Right.
You know, I'm really blown away about how many people choose.
Does the hyperscale clouds, given how complicated and expensive they are.
there was some stat in one of the recent surveys.
I don't know if it was the TSF chip brains one or just a more general developer one.
I, anyway, it doesn't matter.
One of the bigger surveys, 75, 78% people, percent of the people used either Azure AWS or GCP.
Yeah.
And I look at those, I'm like, geez, I don't think 75% of the apps out there need the stuff that those are offering.
And it's so, so much more expensive.
I don't think people fully understand how much more expensive it is to get like a VM on one versus the other.
I did some, I think, you know, it always depends on which one you pick or something, but for a $20 Hetzner server, it's, I think $60 on DigitalOcean, 200 something dollars on AWS.
And I think pushing up towards $300 for, for Azure and what you get when you go up to these prices, you don't get a better experience.
You get a worse one because all the complexity, all the stuff that you got to deal with is not like, well, just here's your server.
Go with like, oh no, no, there's all these other things you got to bring in.
And it just, it super surprises me, that that's the case.
And so, yeah, I don't know.
Yeah, I built working support for Azure early on.
My goal, you know, I worked for Voco originally, then I made it work for one other platform, which was Fly.
Like, okay, cool.
This isn't tied to one platform.
And then the rule of three, I did a platform in a stage.
Like, okay, now I've gotten all the generalities out.
Moving over to VPS as opposed to platform as a service opens up a few new things, but I can, I can, I can put those in internally without making breaking changes in the project.
Yeah.
And Azure does have a platform as a service offering.
Right.
For example, I'm not, I think I'm sure AWS does as well, although I haven't tried to try to use it.
Yeah.
So, I mean, but there are analogies, I don't know.
Well, I also focused on, Veroco.
One of the things for Veroco is, it's, it's one of the fastest deployments I've used.
they've kind of got it dialed.
Azure was taking like 10 or 15 minutes.
So it was hard to do development work against that.
Kim, Kim posted this interesting question or comment.
The various deployment mechanisms, presumably all need credentials.
Are these provided as NV variables?
Many beginners perhaps don't know what it has to do with these.
This project may help.
I agree completely.
so this project is like, I'm approaching VPS credentials around SSH as NV variables.
Cause that's what I've used in the past.
NV variables being files that have basically key values that you don't put into Git, but you
create on the platform, right?
Something like that.
Yeah.
And so the quick start guide will say like export these two environment variables.
You know, your, your IP address and your, your host password, maybe a username if you've
already created a non-root user.
but it goes through and it basically, if you don't give it a username, it tries the default
Django user username and it goes through root and whatnot.
I, it's, it's a little humbling to make these plugins because it shows you exactly where my current
knowledge is at.
but it's also a starting place that works.
And so if somebody looks at this and says like, Hey, you really shouldn't be using the NV variables.
Here's the current best way to use, to deal with credentials.
We can write that into the plugin.
And as Kim is pointing out, it steers all beginners, all people from that point forward, into that
better usage.
And it also comes back to that idea that this isn't just for beginners.
Think about all the people out there who are using NV variables, because that's what they learned.
And maybe if there's something better and the latest version of the plugins cheers them towards that as
well.
yeah.
I've often found there are things that are good for beginners that end up being really helpful for
everybody else as well.
and this product feels like one of those.
Yeah.
That's very cool.
Certainly making your life easier.
Everybody wants that, right?
Yes.
Yeah.
Automated a lot of things.
Okay.
Well, I mean, I'll throw one more thought out there.
Like as you're working on the server, the virtual server side of things, I think there's a lot of
opportunities to leverage.
Docker to say, like, if you could build an image that is 90% the way there, you could just say,
run this Docker image, run this Docker container based on this image.
And what, it doesn't even matter what server it's on.
I think there's, I think there's some interesting stuff you could do with Docker here, but.
Oh, absolutely.
Yes.
I'll let you go down that path.
I certainly have enjoyed it.
yeah.
So what's next?
What do you have to, by the way, I don't know if we called it out.
I mean, this is kind of the 1.0 you mentioned it in passing, but this is the 1.0
milestone sort of thing.
Right.
Yeah.
The 1.0 for this is really about like, people should be able to trust that it's reliable from
this point forward.
It does work.
It works on all three OSs.
for the officially supported, plugins.
I'm going to try to keep a list of, plugins that I'm aware of that are being worked on,
um, and sort out that whole, you know, how do you manage an ecosystem?
but you know, I've also thought of this as like a gift to the Django community.
I wanted to release 1.0 on Christmas.
so I couldn't quite get there.
you know, if you listen to Django chat, when the word deployment comes up, there's
always this grown of, Oh, and that's been there for 20 years.
He's excited as well.
He loves it.
Yes.
but so this, this problem has been in Django in the Django world for 20 years.
How do we deal with the fact that it's hard to deploy Django harder than PHP, harder than
some other things.
And I really think this, this project kind of answers that question or it goes a long way
towards entering it.
and there's a good number of people in the Django community who have been kind of cheerleading
in this, this project for a while.
because if they've seen it, I've announced it in public.
I've kind of done the development in public and that Django cons whatnot.
Yeah.
So awesome.
I'm going to, I'm going to step back from creating more plugins.
I'm going to continue to refine the internals and I'm going to go back to my own like actual
Django projects.
You're going to use it rather than build.
Yes.
You know, that's the way to do it.
Yep.
You know, I think one of the bits of magic of Python and why it's
so popular is it's very welcoming to beginners, right?
People coming from science, like we talked about or other things, they kind of get sucked
in and they're like, huh, it's nice here.
Maybe I'll stay.
And, you know, these kinds of things sort of tell that same story for web developers.
Right.
There might be a point where people outgrow this or they don't, but, but they might, but
it might've gotten them that year's worth of experience running a server or running a platform
as a service app and dealing with all of that so that they're then ready to take whatever
next step that needs to be taken.
If it needs to.
Yeah.
It really smooths out that learning process because you just described it.
you know, Python's welcoming people to learn Python.
They say, Ooh, I want a web front end for this.
Going back to like my father, not releasing his projects.
he was a software developer in like seventies and eighties.
and so he, for him deployment was, I need to make my projects so good.
It can be printed to like 10,000 physical copies.
Yeah.
That's so it's no fault to him for having those unreleased projects.
so the pathway these days is people learn Python and say, okay, I'm solving my problem
with Python.
I want a web front front end so other people can access it.
They learn Django because they already know Python.
That's all smooth.
You know, Django is a bit hard, but you can learn it if you know Python and then they get
to deployment and it's this entirely different class of things to learn.
And that's where that cliff comes in.
And so simple deploy tends to smooth out that.
It basically removes that cliff.
And so you go right from where you are.
I have a project working on my system.
Now it's working on the road server.
I don't fully understand it, but it's much easier to poke around at the working deployment
than poke around at something that you're trying to do that's broken and people end up giving
up.
So yeah, I'm excited about to learn.
Yeah, I'm excited about like opening that pathway for people.
Yeah, absolutely.
That's awesome.
Nice work.
And thanks for doing it.
There's already so much to learn to build a web app to even go from, I know, Python to
a web app because CSS, databases, you know, HTML, JavaScript.
There's already enough that you don't need to throw Linux and CDNs and all that at people
at the same time, right?
Let them go across a chasm and they'll figure it out on the other side.
All right.
Well, thanks for this project.
Maybe final call to action.
People want to get started with it.
What do you tell them?
Go take a look at the docs.
There's a friendly quick start docs show you how it's used.
And there's pretty comprehensive contributing docs.
If you're curious to write a plugin or how about otherwise?
Yeah.
I guess let's close it out with this.
If you got a platform out there, if you're somebody like fly.io, but a different one, consider
creating one of these plugins.
It blows my mind, Eric.
I don't know how you feel, but there'll be some major, major service and you'll go there
and they're like, well, you can use our, our JavaScript API, or you can just write it
from scratch.
Like how much effort is it for one of these companies to spend a week, create a package
for their thing and make it go.
And I think, you know, a sort of a similar call to action, like, Hey, if you want to make
it really easy for people to just switch to your platform, you know, consider following
the steps that you talked about to build a plugin for this.
Right.
Yeah.
And for anybody getting, anybody interested in writing a plugin, feel free to reach out.
I'm happy to, to make sure that works the first time people do it.
Yeah, absolutely.
All right.
Thanks for being here again.
Talk to you later.
Thank you, Michael.
Bye.